#Paging

Paging is often used when a given resource is expected to contain large amounts of data, i.e. perhaps thousands of records
or more. In that case, it would be better for both clients and the API itself to return only a subset of the data, but 
with information about how much data is available, and how to get to it.

As an example, say we issue a query for /api/courses, and assume that there are 943 courses registered on the current
semester (the school suddenly got very big!). The API might decide to return only 100 records, with the additional information:

* The total number of records (943 in our case)
* The page size (100 in our case)
* The offset (0 in our case, since this is the first page, but would be 900 for the last page)
* The actual number of records returned (also 100 in our case, but would be 43 when requesting the last page)

Currently, there are a number of implementations out there.
[This article](http://www.jerriepelser.com/blog/paging-in-aspnet-webapi-introduction) describes a few of the very well. 
In short there are a few options:

* Use a "linked list", where the first request will include in the response header the link to the next page.
* Use a "paging envelope", where the data is stuffed into an envelope and the paging information is returned in the envelope as well.
* Adding the paging information to the response headers (using custom header values).

##Implementation in Web API

[This article](http://www.jerriepelser.com/blog/paging-in-aspnet-webapi-json-envelope) how to implement paging in ASP.NET Web API.

Do note that the approach described will probably mean that the documentation for the return values might not work, and is therefore not a complete solution.

